Write blog post about HPy Meetup in Brno (#42)
hpyproject/hpyproject.org: posts/2023/10/hpy_meetup.md

<!--
.. title: HPy meetup and CPython core dev sprint in Brno (Oct 7-10, 2023)
.. slug: hpy-meetup-2023
.. date: 2023-10-10 10:00:00 UTC
.. author: fangerer
.. tags:
.. category:
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text
-->

We just ended our rather informal HPy meetup in Brno (Czech Republic) which
started on Saturday (October 7th) and lasted until Tuesday (October 10th).

The main topics of the HPy meetup were:

- The CPython Core Dev Sprint
- Cython/HPy

<!--TEASER_END-->

# The CPython Core Dev Sprint

> Petr Viktorin, one of the most active CPython core developers, invited us to

Reviewer: "Active" is arguable. I am the one most active in HPy, I guess :)
Could you remove it?
```suggestion
Petr Viktorin, one of the CPython core developers, invited us to
```

partially attend the CPython core developer sprint. As a part of the sprint, he

> organized a C API Summit where we were invited and happily attended this event.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
organized a C API Summit Monday where we were invited and happily attended this event.
```

Besides of lots of discussions, there were also very interesting presentations
about the C API:

## 1. C API Work Group Summary

Irit presented the current status of the [C API Work Group

> GitHub](https://github.com/capi-workgroup) organisation. The idea of this GitHub

Reviewer 2: She just published her slides at: https://github.com/iritkatriel/talks/blob/main/2023_Sprint_Brno_C_API.pdf

You can add a link ;-)

org was to gather curent [problems](https://github.com/capi-workgroup/problems)
of the C API and also to collect ideas for the (re-)volution of the API. Irit
thankfully went over all issues and discussions to structure and summarize them.
She identified nine categories for problems:

1. API Evolution and Maintenance
2. API Specification and Abstraction
3. Object Reference Management
4. Type Definition and Object Creation
5. Error Handling
6. API Tiers and Stability Guarantees
7. The C Language
8. Implementation Flaws
9. Missing Functionality

She also mentioned strengths of the C API which the people contributing to the repository
agree on:

- Heap types
- APIs taking a C string to look up based on Python strings
- Limited API and Stable ABI

Now, the idea is to write an _Informational PEP_ and then to create:

1. A process for discussions about replacement APIs
2. Guidelines for [evolution of the C API](https://github.com/capi-workgroup/api-evolution).

> 

Reviewer 2: The PEP draft is now at: https://github.com/python/peps/pull/3491

## 2. Petr's Vision for the C API

> Petr presented his understanding of how the C API should look in future. He made

Reviewer: Feel free to share my slides. They aren't the whole talk, but do have a few more details.
```suggestion
Petr presented his understanding of how the C API should look in future.
The [slides](https://drive.google.com/file/d/148NLRPXGZGI1SXfKLMFvQc_iv67hPJQS/view?usp=sharing) for his talk are public.
He made
```

   using specifications than by allocating empty objects and filling them with
   content. Just think of `PyType_Spec` or `PyModuleDef`.

7. _Context argument_: Every API function should have a context argument.

Except for points 4 and 5, these goals are very close to HPy's. We, the
HPy team, have to say that this sounds very good and we would be happy to see
that in CPython.

## 3. HPy's Lessons Learned

We were also asked to give a talk and to concentrate in the talk on two things:

1. How do handles affect the API, and
2. What is the reason for the HPy context to contain the function table.

We didn't _advertise_ HPy in our talk but we talked about why opaque handles
are not only useful but sometimes necessary and how the API would change
compared to having only `PyObject *`.
We further showed that having the function table in the context gives us a lot
of flexibility and finally enables us to switch on the debug mode essentially at
run time (when an extension is loaded).

We are not sure if we managed to convince everyone that those concepts are useful.
The biggest problem is that introducing handles and a context argument will

> radically change the API and break a lot of extensions (see also

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
radically change the API and require changes in many libraries.
As an aside: HPy provides a path for migrating such libraries gradually.
(see also
```

[C API Workgroup - API Revolution #2](https://github.com/capi-workgroup/api-revolution/issues/2)
and [C API Workgroup - API Revolution #7](https://github.com/capi-workgroup/api-revolution/issues/7)).

# Discussions

We had a lot of good discussions and probably the most important one was about
the [PEP 703 (noGIL)](https://peps.python.org/pep-0703/) implementation and the
new version of ABI (abi4) that is planned to be compatible with both noGIL and
GIL builds of CPython. In order to achieve that, Sam, the author of PEP
703, plans to make `PyObject *` opaque (so it will narrow to the semantics of a

> handle) and also, the `Py_INCREF` will use an indirection over a function

Reviewer: AFAIK, the indirection is only planned for `abi4` builds targetting Python 3.11 and below. As support for old Python versions is dropped, it's expected to go away (be replaced by a regular function call, or whatever new mechanism will be used).
```suggestion
handle) and also, the `Py_INCREF` will, in some cases, use an indirection over a function
```

<!--
.. title: HPy meetup and CPython core dev sprint in Brno (Oct 7-10, 2023)
.. slug: hpy-meetup-2023
.. date: 2023-10-10 10:00:00 UTC
.. author: fangerer
.. tags:
.. category:
.. link:
.. description:
.. type: text
-->

> We just ended our rather informal HPy meetup in Brno (Czeck Republic) which

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We just ended our rather informal HPy meetup in Brno (Czech Republic) which
```

Author: oops, thanks 😄 (wrote that on the train at night; I was already a bit tired)

started on Saturday (October 7th) and lasted until Tuesday (October 10th).

> The main topic if the HPy meetup was:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The main topics of the HPy meetup were:
```

- The CPython Core Dev Sprint
- Cython/HPy

<!--TEASER_END-->

# The CPython Core Dev Sprint

Petr Viktorin, one of the most active CPython core developers, invited us to
partially attend the CPython core developer sprint. As a part of the sprint, he
organized a C API Summit where we were invited and happily attended this event.

> Besides of lots of discussions, there were also very interesting presentation

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Besides of lots of discussions, there were also very interesting presentations
```

about the C API:

## 1. C API Work Group Summary

Irit Katriel presented the current status of the [C API Work Group
GitHub](https://github.com/capi-workgroup) organisation. The idea of this GitHub
org was to gather curent [problems](https://github.com/capi-workgroup/problems)
of the C API and also to collect ideas for the (re-)volution of the API. Irit
thankfully went over all issues and discussions to structure and summarize them.
She identified nine categories for problems:

1. API Evolution and Maintenance
2. API Specification and Abstraction
3. Object Reference Management
4. Type Definition and Object Creation
5. Error Handling
6. API Tiers and Stability Guarantees
7. The C Language
8. Implementation Flaws
9. Missing Functionality

> At this point, I also want to mentioned the stengths of the C API which we also can

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
At this point, I also want to mentioned the strengths of the C API which we also can
```

> At this point, I also want to mentioned the strengths of the C API which we also can

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
She also mentioned strengths of the C API which the people contributing to the repository
```

> At this point, I also want to mentioned the stengths of the C API which I can
> only agree on:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
At this point, I also want to mentioned the stengths of the C API which we also can
agree on:
```

the rest of the post uses "we", better to stick with it

- Heap types
- APIs taking a C string to look up based on Python strings
- Limited API and Stable ABI

Now, the idea is to write an _Informational PEP_ and then to create:

1. A process for discussions about replacement APIs
2. Guidelines for [evolution of the C API](https://github.com/capi-workgroup/api-evolution).

## 2. Petr's Vision for the C API

Petr presented his understanding of how the C API should look in
future. Many of the concepts he presented are very similar to core concept of

> HPy. Maybe the HPy project could positively influence him (since Petr also

Reviewer 6: ```
Maybe the HPy project could positively influence him (since Petr also
regularly participates in the HPy dev call meetings) but who knows?
```

I would remove the entire sentence, it doesn't add anything.

regularly participates in the HPy dev call meetings) but who knows?

Petr made seven suggestions:

1. _Split_ API from ABI so you can compile the API that it would use different ABI
   variants.

2. _Consistency_: The API should have a consistent behavior. E.g. APIs should
   not return borrowed references and the exception behavior should be clear by the
   naming convention.

3. _Versioning_: Essentially, a C extension should include the ABI version it
   was compiled with.

4. _Errors_: All API functions must be able to signal an error that can be
   handled.

5. _Concrete types_: The API should provide dedicated C types for certain
   built-in objects to have type safety already at the C language level.

6. _Blueprint structures_: Creating types and objects should rather be done by

>    using specifications than by allocting empty objects and filling them with

Reviewer 8: allocting ?

   content. Just think of `PyType_Spec` or `PyModuleDef`.

7. _Context argument_: Every API function should have a context argument.

> I would say, except of points 4 and 5, HPy already follows everything. We, the

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Except for points 4 and 5, these goals are very close to HPy's. We, the
```

> HPy teams, need to say that this sounds very good and we would be happy to see

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
HPy team, have to say that this sounds very good and we would be happy to see
```

that in CPython.

## 3. HPy's Lessons Learned

We were also asked to give a talk and to concentrate in the talk on two things:

> 1. How do handles affect the API, aned

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. How do handles affect the API, and
```

2. What is the reason for the HPy context to contain the function table.

> We didn't _advertise_ HPy in our talk but we talked about why opaque handles

Reviewer 6: Will you link the slides?

are not only useful but sometimes necessary and how the API would change
compared to having only `PyObject *`.
We further showed that having the function table in the context gives us a lot
of flexibility and finally enables us to switch on the debug mode essentially at
run time (when an extension is loaded).

> We are not sure if we could convince everyone, that those concepts are useful.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We are not sure if we managed to convince everyone that those concepts are useful.
```

The biggest problem is that introducing handles and a context argument will
radically change the API and break a lot of extensions.

> 

Author: Good point. I'll do that.

# Discussions

We had a lot of good discussions and probably the most important one was about

> the Nogil implementation because this implies some very interesting changes that

Reviewer 9: suggestion:

"...about the [PEP 703](https://peps.python.org/pep-0703/) (noGIL) implementation and the new version of ABI (abi4) that is planned to be compatible with both noGIL and GIL builds of CPython. In order to achieve that, Sam Gross, the author of PEP 703, plans to..."

> will improve lives for alternative implementations also. Sam, the author of

Reviewer 8: Only "Sam" and "Petr", while "Irit Katriel"...

Python's Nogil fork, plans to make `PyObject *` opaque (so it will narrow to the
semantics of a handle) and also, the `Py_INCREF` will use an indirection over a
function pointer to actually call the incref logic. This is, again, a big step

> forward for alternative implementations

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
forward for alternative implementations.
```
